good evening the television and radio
stations of the united states and their
affiliated stations are proud to provide
facilities for a discussion of issues
in the current political campaign by
the two major candidates for the
presidency the candidates need no
introduction the republican candidate
vice president richard m nixon and the
democratic candidate senator john f
kennedy according to rules set by the
candidates themselves each man shall
make an opening statement of
approximately eight minutes duration and
a closing statement of approximately
three minutes duration in between the
candidates will answer or comment upon
answers to questions put by a panel of
correspondents in this the first
discussion in a series of four joint
appearances the subject matter has been
agreed will be restricted to internal or
domestic american matters and now for
the first opening statement by senator
john f kennedy
mr smith mr nixon in the election of 1860 abraham lincoln
said the question was whether this
nation could exist half-slave or
half-free in the election of 1960 and
with the world around us the question is
whether the world will exist half-slave
or half-free whether it will move in the
direction of freedom in the direction of
the road that we are taking or whether
it will move in the direction of slavery
i think it will depend in great measure
upon what we do here in the united
states on the kind of society that we build on the kind
of strength that we maintain we discuss
tonight domestic issues but i would not want
that to be any implication to be given
that this does not involve directly our
struggle with mr khrushchev for survival
mr khrushchev is in new york and he
maintains the communist offensive
throughout the world because of the
productive power of the soviet union
itself the chinese communists have
always had a large population but they
are important and dangerous now because
they are mounting a major effort within
their own country
the kind of country we have here the
kind of society we have the kind of
strength we build in the united states
will be the defense of freedom if we do
well here if we meet our obligations if
we're moving ahead then i think freedom
will be secure around the world if we
fail then freedom fails therefore i think
the question before the american people
is are we doing as much as we can do are
we as strong as we should be are we as
strong as we must be if we're going to
maintain our independence and if we're
going to maintain and hold out the hand
of friendship to those who look to us
for assistance to those who look to us
for survival i should make it very clear
that i do not think we're doing enough
that i am not satisfied as an american
with the progress that we're making
this is a great country but i think it
could be a greater country and this is a
powerful country but i think it could be
a more powerful country i'm not
satisfied to have fifty percent of our steel mill
capacity unused i'm not satisfied when
the united states had last year the
lowest rate of economic growth of any
major industrialized society in the
world because economic growth means strength
and vitality
it means we're able to sustain our
defenses it means we're able to meet our
commitments abroad i'm not satisfied
when we have over nine billion dollars
worth of food some of it rotting even
though there is a hungry world and even
though four million americans wait every
month for a food package from the
government which averages five cents a day
per individual
i saw cases in west virginia here in the
united states where children took home
part of their school lunch in order to
feed their families because i don't
think we're meeting our obligation
towards these americans i'm not
satisfied when the soviet union is
turning out twice as many scientists and
engineers as we are i'm not satisfied
when many of our teachers are
inadequately paid or when our children go to
school part-time shifts i think we
should have an educational system second
to none i'm not satisfied when i see men
like jimmy hoffa in charge of the
largest union in the united states still
free i'm not satisfied when we are
failing to develop the natural resources
of the united states to the fullest here
in the united states which developed the
tennessee valley and which built the
grand coulee and the other dams in the
northwest united states at the present
rate of hydropower production and that
is the hallmark of an industrialized
society the soviet union by 1975 will be
producing more power than we are
these are all the things i think in this
country that can make our society strong
or can mean that it stands still i'm not
satisfied until every american enjoys
his full constitutional rights if a
negro baby is born and this is true also
of puerto ricans and mexicans in some of
our cities he has about one-half as much chance
to get through high school as a white
baby he has one-third as much chance to get through
college as a white student he has about
a third as much chance to be a professional
man about half as much chance to own a
house he has about uh four times as
much chance that he'll be out of work in
his life
as the white baby i think we can do
better i don't want the talents of any
american to go to waste i know that there
are those who say that we want to turn
everything over to the government i
don't at all
i want the individuals to meet their
responsibilities and i want the states
to meet their responsibilities but i
think there is also a national
responsibility the argument has been
used against every piece of social
legislation in the last twenty-five years the
people of the united states individually
could not have developed the tennessee
valley collectively they could have a
cotton farmer in georgia or a peanut
farmer or a dairy farmer in wisconsin or
minnesota he cannot protect himself
against the forces of supply and demand
in the marketplace but working together
in effective governmental programs he can
do so seventeen million americans who live over
sixty-five on an average social security check
of about seventy-eight dollars a month they're not
able to sustain themselves individually
but they can sustain themselves through
the social security system i don't
believe in big government but i believe
in effective governmental action and i
think that's the only way that the
united states is going to maintain its
freedom it's the only way we're going to
move ahead i think we can do a better
job i think we're going to have to do a
better job if we are going to meet the
responsibilities which time and events
have placed upon us we cannot turn the
job over to anyone else if the united
states fails then the whole cause of
freedom fails and i think it depends in
great measure on what we do here in this
country the reason franklin roosevelt was a good
neighbor in latin america was because he
was a good neighbor in the united states
because they felt that the american
society was moving again i want us to
recapture that image i want people in
latin america and africa and asia to
start to look to america to see how
we're doing things to wonder what the
president of the united states is doing
and not to look at khrushchev or look at
the chinese communists that is the
obligation upon our generation in 1933
franklin roosevelt
said in his inaugural that this
generation of americans has a rendezvous
with destiny i think our generation of
americans has the same rendezvous the
question now is can freedom be
maintained under the most severe tack
attack it has ever known
i think it can be and i think in the
final analysis it depends upon what we
do here i think it's time america
started moving again and now the opening
statement by vice president richard m
nixon mr smith senator kennedy
the things that senator kennedy has said
many of us can agree with there is no
question but that we cannot discuss our
internal affairs in the united states
without recognizing that they have a
tremendous bearing on our international
position there is no question but that
this nation cannot stand still because
we are in a deadly competition a
competition not only with the men in the
kremlin but the men in peking we're
ahead in this competition as senator
kennedy i think has implied but when
you're in a race the only way to stay
ahead is to move ahead and i subscribe
completely to the spirit that senator
kennedy has expressed tonight the spirit
that the united states should move ahead
where then do we disagree i think we
disagree on the implication of his
remarks tonight and on the statements
that he has made on many occasions
during his campaign to the effect that
the united states has been standing
still we heard tonight for example the
statement made that our growth in
national product last year was the
lowest of any industrial nation in the
world now last year of course was 1958 that
happened to be a recession year but when
we look at the growth of gnp this year a
year of recovery we find that it's six and
nine-tenths percent and one of the
highest in the world today more about
that later looking then to this problem
of how the united states should move
ahead and where the united states is moving i
think it is well that we take the advice
of a very famous campaigner let's look
at the record is the united states
standing still is it true that this
administration as senator kennedy has
charged has been an administration of
retreat of defeat of stagnation is it
true that as far as this country is
concerned in the field of electric power
in all of the fields that he has
mentioned we have not been moving ahead
well we have a comparison that we can
make we have the record of the truman
administration of seven and a half years
and the seven and a half years of the
eisenhower administration when we
compare these two records in the areas
that senator kennedy has has discussed
tonight i think we find that america has
been moving ahead
let's take schools we have built more
schools in these last seven and a half
years than we built in the previous seven
and a half for that matter in the
previous twenty years
let's take hydroelectric power we have
developed more hydroelectric power in
these seven and a half years than was
developed in any previous administration
in history let us take hospitals we find
that more have been built in this
administration than in the previous
administration the same is true of
highways let's put it in terms that all of us can
understand we often hear gross national product
discussed and in that respect may i say
that when we compare the growth in this
administration with that of the previous
administration that then there was a
total growth of eleven percent over seven years
in this administration there has been a
total growth of nineteen percent over seven years
that shows that there's been more growth
in this administration than in its
predecessor but let's not put it there
let's put it in terms of the average
family what has happened to you we find
that your wages have gone up five times
as much in the eisenhower administration
as they did in the truman administration
what about the prices you pay we find
that the prices you pay went up five
times as much in the truman
administration as they did in the eisenhower
administration what's the net result of
this this means that the average family
income went up fifteen percent in the eisenhower
years as against two percent in the truman years
now this is not standing still but good
as this record is may i emphasize it
isn't enough a record is never something
to stand on it's something to build on
and in building on this record i believe
that we have the secret for progress we
know the way to progress and i think
first of all our own record proves that
we know the way senator kennedy has
suggested that he believes he knows the
way i respect the sincerity which he
which he makes that suggestion but on
the other hand when we look at the
various programs that he offers they do
not seem to be new they seem to be
simply retreads of the programs of the
truman administration which preceded it
and i would suggest that during the
course of the evening he might indicate
those areas in which his programs are
new where they will mean more progress
than we had then what kind of programs
are we for we are for programs that will
expand educational opportunities that
will give to all americans their equal
chance for education for all of the
things which are necessary and dear to
the hearts of our people we are for
programs in addition which will see that
our medical care for the aged is are
much is much better handled than it is
at the present time here again may i
indicate that senator kennedy and i are
not in disagreement as to the aims we
both want to help the old people we want
to see that they do have adequate
medical care the question is the means i
think that the means that i advocate
will reach that goal better than the
means that he advocates i could give
better examples but for for whatever it
is whether it's in the field of housing
or health or medical care or schools or
the eh development of electric power we
have programs which we believe will move
america move her forward and build on the
wonderful record that we have made
over these past seven and a half years
now when we look at these programs might
i suggest that in evaluating them we
often have a tendency to say that the
test of a program is how much you're
spending i will concede that in all the
areas to which i have referred senator
kennedy would have the spe federal
government spend more than i would have
it spend i costed out the cost of the
democratic platform it runs a minimum of
thirteen and two-tenths billions dollars a year more
than we are presently spending to a
maximum of eighteen billion dollars a year
more than we're presently spending now the
republican platform will cost more too it
will cost a minimum of four billion
dollars a year more a maximum of four
and nine-tenths billion dollar a year more than
we're presently spending
now does this mean that his program is
better than ours not at all because it
isn't a question of how much the federal
government spends it isn't a question of
which government does the most it's a
question of which administration does
the right thing and in our case i do
believe that our programs will stimulate
the creative energies of a hundred and
eighty million free americans i believe
the programs that senator kennedy
advocates will have a tendency to stifle
those creative energies
i believe in other words that his
program would lead to the stagnation of
the motive power that we need in this
country to get progress the final point
that i would like to make is this senator
kennedy has suggested in his speeches
that we lack compassion for the poor for
the old and for others that are
unfortunate let us understand throughout
this campaign that his motives and mine
are sincere i know what it means to be
poor i know what it means to see people
who are unemployed i know senator
kennedy feels as deeply about these
problems as i do but our disagreement is
not about the goals for america but only
about the means to reach those goals
thank you mr nixon that completes the
opening statements and now the
candidates will answer questions or
comment upon one another's answers to
questions put by correspondents of the
networks the correspondence i'm sandra
van ocher nbc news i'm charles wan
beautiful news i'm stewart dothan cbs
news about plumbing abc news the first
questions who senator kennedy from mr
fleming senator the vice president his
campaign has said that you are a naive
and at times immature he has raised the
question of leadership on this issue why
do you think people should vote for you
rather than a vice president the vice
president and i came to the congress
together 1946 we both served in the
labor committee i've been there now for
14 years the same period of time as you
have so that our experience in
government is comfortable secondly i
think the question is and what are the
programs that we advocate what is the
party record that we lead i come out of
the democratic party which in this
century has produced woodrow wilson and
franklin roosevelt and harry truman and
which supported and sustained these
programs which i've discussed tonight
mr nixon comes out of the republican
party he was nominated by it and it is
the fact that through most of these last
25 years the republican leadership has
opposed federal aid for education
medical care for the ages
development of the tennessee valley
development of our natural resources
i think mr nixon is an effective leader
of his party i hope he would grant me
the same the question before us is which
point of view and which party do we want
to lead the united states mr nixon
would you like to comment on that
statement the next question mr novak's
mr vice president your campaign
stresses the value of your 8-year
experience and the question arises as to
whether that experience was as an
observer or as a participant or as an
initiator of policymaking would you tell
us please specifically what major
proposals you have made in the last
eight years but have been adopted by the
administration but be rather difficult
to cover them in aten in two and a half
minutes i would suggest that these
proposals could be mentioned first after
each of my foreign trips i have made
recommendations that have been adopted
for example after my first trip of raw
broad i strongly recommended that we
increase our exchange programs
particularly as they related to exchange
a person of leaders in the labor field
and in the information field after my
trip to south america
i made recommendations that a separate
inter-american lending agency be set up
which the south american nations would
like much better than they lent then to
participate in the lending agencies
which treated all the countries of the
world the same i have made other
recommendations after each of the other
trips for example after my trip abroad
to hungary i made some recommendations
with regard to the hungarian refugee
situation which were adopted not only by
the president but some of them were
enacted into law by the congress within
the administration as a chairman of the
president's committee on price stability
and economic growth i have had the
opportunity to make recommendations
which have been adopted within the
administration and which i think have
been reasonably effective i know senator
kennedy suggested in a speech at
cleveland yesterday that that committee
had not been particularly effective
i would only suggest that while we do
not take the credit for it i would not
presume to that since that committee has
been formed the priceline has been held
very well within the united states i
would say in the latter that the and
that's what i found that somewhat
unsatisfactory about the figures that
mr nixon that you used in your previous
speech when you talk about the truman
administration you mr truman came to
office in 1944 and at the end of the war
and difficulties that were facing the
united states during that period of
transition 1946 when price controls were
lifted so it's rather difficult to use
an overall figure of taking those seven
and a half years and comparing them to
the last eight years i'd prefer to take
the overall percentage record of the
last 20 years
after the eight years of the republicans
to show an overall period of growth and
regard to price stability i'm not aware
that that committee did produce
recommendations that ever were certainly
before the congress from the point of
view of legislation in regard to
controlling prices
in regard to the exchange of students of
labor unions i am chair of the
subcommittee on africa and i think that
one of the most unfortunate phases of
our policy towards that country was a
very manute number of exchanges that we
had and it's true of latin america also
we did come forward with a program of
students for the congo of over 300 which
was more than the federal government had
for all of africa the previous year so
that i don't think that this we have
moved in at least in those two areas
with sufficient vigor the next question
to senator kennedy from mr warren
senator kennedy during your brief speech
a few minutes ago you mentioned farm
surpluses i'd like to ask this it's a
fact i think the presidential candidates
traditionally make promises to farmers
lots of people i think don't understand
why the government pays farmers for not
producing certain crops or paying
farmers if they over produce for that
let me ask sir why can't the farmer
operate like the businessman who
operates a factory if an auto company
over produces a certain model car uncle
sam doesn't step in and buy up the
surplus why this constant courting of
the farmer well because i think that if
the federal government moved out of the
program and withdrew its support then i
think you would have complete that
economic chaos the farmer plants in the
spring and harvest in the fall there are
hundreds of thousands then they really
don't not able to control their market
very well
they bring their crops in or their
livestock in many of them about the same
time they have only a few purchasers
that buy their milk or they are forbes
few large companies in many cases and
therefore the farmer is not in a
position to bargain very effectively in
the marketplace i think the experience
of the 20s has shown what a free market
could do to agriculture and if the
agricultural economy collapses then the
economy of the rest of the united states
sooner or later will collapse the
farmers are the number one market for
the automobile industry of the unites
state the automobile industry the number
one market for steel so if the farmers
economy continues to decline as sharply
as it has in recent years then i think
you would have a recession in the rest
of the country so i think the case for
the government intervention is a good
secondly my objection to president farm
policy is that there are no effective
controls to bring supply and demand into
better balance the dropping of the
support price in order to limit
production is not worth and we now have
the highest surfaces nine billion
dollars worth we've had a higher tax
load from the treasury for the farmer in
the last few years with the lowest farm
income in many years i think that this
farm policy has failed and my judgment
the only policy that will work will be
for effective supply and demand to be
invalid and that can only be done
through governmental action i therefore
suggest that in those basic commodities
which are supported at the federal
government after endorsement by the
farmers in that commodity attempt to
bring supply and demand into balance
attempt effective production controls so
we won't have that five or six percent
surplus which breaks the price fifteen
or twenty percent
i think mr benson's program has failed
and i must say after reading the vice
president speech before the farmers as
he read mine i don't believe that it's
very much different to mr benson i
don't think it's provides effective
governmental control i think the support
prices are tied to the average market
price of the last three years which was
mr benson's theory i therefore do not
believe that this is a sharp enough
breach with the past give us any hope of
success for the future mr nixon comment
i of course disagree with senator
kennedy and so far as his suggestion as
to what should be done with me on the
farm program he has made the suggestion
that what we need is to move in the
direction of more government controls a
suggestion that would also mean raising
prices that the consumers pay for
products and imp and imposing upon the
farmers controls on acreage even far
more than they have today i think this
is the wrong direction i don't think
this has worked in the past
i do not think of it worth in the future
the program that i have advocated is one
which departs from the present program
that we have in this respect it
recognizes that the government has a
responsibility to get the farmer out of
the trouble he presently is in because
the government got him into it and
that's the fundamental reason why we
can't let the farmer go by himself at
the present time the farmer produced
these surpluses because the government
asked him to through legislation during
the war now that we have these surpluses
it's our responsibility to indemnify the
farmer during that period that we get
rid of the partner the surplus until we
get the surplus is off the farmers back
color we should have a program such as i
announced which will see that farm
income holds up but i would propose
holding that income up not through a
type of program that senator kennedy has
suggested that would raise prices but
one that would indemnify the farmer pay
the farmer in kind from the products
which are in surplus
the next question to vice president
nixon from mr vanover mr vice
president says the question of executive
leadership is a very important campaign
issue i'd like to follow mr novak's
question now republican campaign slogans
to see them on signs around the
countries we did last week say it's
experience that counts that's over a
picture of yourself sir implying that
you've had more governmental executive
decision-making experience in your
opponent now in his news conference on
august 24th president eisenhower was
asked to give one example of a major
idea of yours that he adopted his reply
was and i'm quoting if you give me a
week i might think of one i don't
remember now that was a month ago sir
and the president hasn't brought it up
and i'm wondering sir if you can clarify
which version is correct the one put out
by republican campaign leaders or the
one put out by president eisenhower well
i would suggest mr vanover that you
know the president that was probably a
facetious remark i would also suggest
that insofar as his statement is
concerned that i think it would be
improper for the president of the united
states to disclose the instances in
which members of his official family had
made recommendations as i have made them
through the years to him which he has
accepted or rejected the president has
always maintained and very properly so
that he is entitled to get what advice
he wants from his cabinet and from his
other advisors without disclosing that
to anybody including as a matter of fact
to congress now i can only say this
through the years
aya said in the national security
council i have been in the cabinet i
have met with the legislative leaders i
have met with the president when he made
the great decisions with regard to
lebanon chamoy mat-su other matters the
president has asked for my advice i have
given it sometimes my advice has been
taken sometimes it is not i do not say
that i have made the decision and i
would say that no president should ever
allow anybody else to make the major
decision the president only makes the
decision all that his advisors do is to
give counsel when he asked for it as far
as what experience counts and whether
that is experienced account that isn't
for me to say i can only say that my
experience is there for the people to
consider senator kennedy was there for
the people to consider as he pointed out
we came to the congress in the same year
his experience has been different from
mine mine has been in the executive
branch his has been in the legislative
branch i would say that the people now
have the opportunity to evaluate his as
against mine and i think both he and i
are going to abide by whatever the
people decide senator kennedy question
is of experience and the question also
is what our judgment is in the future
and what's our goals off the united
states and what ability we have to
implement those goals
abraham lincoln came to the presidency
in 1860 after a father
little-known a session in the house of
representatives and after being defeated
for the senate 58 with the distinguished
president there is no certain road to
the presidency there are no guarantees
that if you take the one road or another
that you will be
for president i have been in the
congress for 14 years i have voted in
the last eight years and vice president
was presiding over the senate and
meeting his other responsibilities i
have met decisions over eight hundred
times on matters which affect not only
the domestic security of the united
states as a member of the senate foreign
relations committee the question really
is which candidate in which party can
meet the problems that the united states
is going to face in the system
the next question to senator kennedy
from mr novak's
somebody kennedy in connection to these
problems of the future that you speak of
then the program that you enunciated
earlier in your direct talk you call for
expending some of the welfare programs
for schools for teacher salaries medical
care and so forth but you also call for
reducing the federal debt and i'm
wondering how you if you're president in
january would go about paying the bill
for all this they doesn't mean i'm an
advocate i did not advocate reducing the
federal debt because i don't believe
that you're going to be able to reduce
the federal debt very much in 1960 1 2
or 3 and if you have heavy obligations
which affect our security which we're
going to have to meet and therefore i've
never suggested we should be able to
retire the debt substantially or even at
all in 1961 though i believe and one of
your expenses you have adjusted that
reducing the interest rate would help
toward no no not reducing the interest
reducing the interest rate in my
judgment the hard money tight money
policy fiscal policy of this
administration has contributed to the
slowdown in our economy which helped
bring the recession of 54 which made the
recession of 58 rather intense and which
is slow somewhat our economic activity
in 1960 what i have talked about however
the kind of programs that i talked about
in my judgment are fiscally sound
medical care for the aged i would put on
the social security vice president and i
disagree on this program the javits
nixon or the nixon javits program would
have cost you fully used a 600 million
dollars by the government for a year and
600 million dollars by the state the
program which i advocated which failed
by five votes in the united states
senate would have put medical care for
the ages and social security and would
have been paid for through the social
security system
the social security tax secondly i
support federal aid to education and
federal aid for teacher salaries i think
that's a good investment i think we're
going to have to do it and i think to
keep the burden further on the property
tax which is already strained in many of
our community will provide will make
insure in my opinion that many of our
children will not be adequately educated
and many of our teachers not adequately
compensated there is no greater return
to an economy or to a society in an
educational system second to none and
the question of the development of
natural resources i would pay as you go
in the sense that they would be balanced
and the power revenues would bring back
sufficient money to finance the projects
in the same way as the tennessee valley
i believe in the balanced budget and the
only conditions under which i would
unbalance the budget would be if there
was a grave national emergency or a
serious recession otherwise with a
steady rate of economic growth and mr
nixon and mr rockefeller in their
meeting said a five percent economic
growth would bring by 1960 to ten
billion dollars extra in tax road
whatever is brought in i think that we
can finance essential program within a
balanced budget yep
business remains orderly i think what
mr novik referring to was not one of
senator kennedy speeches with the
democratic platform which did mention
cutting the national debt i think too
that it should be pointed out that of
course it is not possible particularly
under the proposal to tender to kennedy
have advocated either to cut the
national debt or to reduce taxes as a
matter of fact it will be necessary to
raise taxes now senator kennedy points
out that as far as his one proposal is
concerned the one for medical care for
the aged that that would be financed out
of social security that however is
raising taxes for those who pay social
security he points out that he would
make pay-as-you-go be the basis for our
natural resources development where our
natural resources development which i
also supported certainly however
whenever you and in appropriate money
for one of these projects you have to
pay now and appropriates the money and
the while they eventually do pay out it
doesn't mean that you government doesn't
have to put on
the money this year and so i would say
that in all of these proposals senator
kennedy has made they will result in one
of two things
either he has to raise taxes or he has
to unbalance the budget if he unbalances
the budget that means you have inflation
and that will be of course a very cruel
blow to the very people the older people
that we've been talking about as far as
aid for school construction is concerned
i favor that as senator kennedy did in
january of this year when he said he
favored that rather than paved his
future salaries i favor that because i
believe that's the best way to aid our
schools without running any risk
whatever of the federal government
telling our teachers what to teach the
next question to vice president nixon
from mr warren mr vice president you
mentioned schools it was just yesterday
i think you asked for a crash program to
raise education standards and this
evening you talked about advances in
education mr vice president you said in
his back in 1957 but salaries paid the
school teachers were nothing short of a
national disgrace higher salaries for
teachers you added was important and if
the situation wasn't corrected who would
lead to a national disaster yet you
refused to vote in the senate in order
to break a tie vote when that single
vote if it had been guessed would have
granted salary increases to teachers i
wonder if you could explain that awfully
glad you get got that question because
as you know i got into it at the last
another question wasn't able to complete
the argument i think that the reason
that i voted against having the federal
government pay teacher salaries was
probably the very reason that concerned
senator kennedy when in january of this
year in his kick off press conference he
said that he favored aid for school
construction but at that time did not
feel that there should be a for teacher
salaries at least that's why i read his
remarks no why should there be any
question about the federal government
aiding teacher salaries why did senator
kennedy take that position then why do i
take it now we both took it then and i
take it now for this reason we want
higher teacher self we need higher
but we also want our education to be
free of federal control when the federal
government gets the power to pay
teachers inevitably in my opinion it
will acquire the power to set standards
and to tell the teachers what to teach i
think this would be bad for the country
i think it would be bad for the teaching
profession there is another point that
should be made
i favor higher salaries for teachers but
a senator kennedy said in january of
this year in the same press conference
the way that you get higher salaries for
teachers is to support school
construction which means that all the
local school districts in the various
states then have money which is freed to
raise the standards for teacher size i
should also point out this once you put
the responsibility on the federal
government for paying a portion of
teachers on your local communities and
your state are not going to meet the
responsibilities as much as they should
i believe in other words that we have
seen the local communities in the state
assuming more of that responsibility
teacher salaries very fortunately have
gone up 50 percent in the last eight
years as against only a 34 percent rise
for other salaries this is not enough it
should be more but i do not believe that
the way to get more salaries for
teachers is to have the federal
government get in with a massive program
my objection here is not the cost in
dollars my objection here is the
potential cost in controls and eventual
freedom for the american people by
giving the federal government power over
education and that is the greatest power
of government can have senator kennedy
has come in when the vice president
coached me in january 60 i do not
believe the federal government should
pay directly teacher salary but that was
not the issue before the senate in
february the issue before the senate was
that the money would be given to the
state the state then could determine
whether the money would be spent for
school construction or teacher salaries
on that question the vice president and
i disagreed i voted in favor of that
proposal and supported it strongly
because i think that that provided
assistance to our teachers for their
salaries without any chance of federal
control and it is on that vote that
means mr nixon and i disagreed and his
tie vote defeated because breaking the
tie defeated the proposal i don't want
the federal government paying teachers
salaries directly but if the money will
go to the states and the states can then
determine whether it she'll go for
school construction or for teacher
salaries in my opinion you protect the
local authority over the school board in
the school committee and therefore i
think that was a sound proposal and that
is why i supported it and i regret that
it did not tap secondly there have been
statements made that the democratic
platform would cost a good deal of money
and that i'm in favor of unbalancing the
budget that is wholly wrong wholly in
error and it is a fact that in the last
eight years the democratic congress has
reduced the appropriate the request for
the appropriation by over ten billion
dollars that is not my view and i think
it ought to be stated very clearly on
the record my view is you can do these
programs and they should be carefully
drawn within a balanced budget if our
economy is moving ahead the next
question to senator kennedy from mr
beniker the senator you've been
promising the voters that if you are
elected president you'll try and push
through congress bills on medical aid to
the aged a comprehensive minimum hourly
wage bill federal aid to education now
in the august post-convention session of
the congress when you at least held up a
possibility you could one day be
president and when you had overwhelming
majorities especially in the senate you
could not get action on these bills now
how do you feel that you'll be able to
get them in january well there weren't
any weapon in august if i may take the
bills we did pass in the senate the bill
to provide a dollar 25 cent minimum wage
it failed because the house did not pass
it in the house failed by 11 vote and i
might say the two thirds of the
republicans in the house voted against a
dollar 25 cent minimum wage and a
majority of the democrats sustained at
nearly 2/3 of them voted for the dollar
25 we were threatened by a be know if we
passed the dollar and a quarter it's
extremely difficult with a great power
that the president does to pass any bill
when the president is opposed all the
president needs to sustain his veto of
any bill is 1/3 plus 1 and either the
house or the senate secondly we pay
they federal aid to education bill in
the senate it failed to come to the
floor of the house of representatives it
was killed in the rules committee and it
is a fact in the august session if the
four members of the rules committee who
were republican joining with two
democrats voted against sending the
eight education bill to the floor of the
house or democrats voted for it every
republican on the rules committee voted
against sending that veil to be
considered by the members of the house
of representatives thirdly
on medical care for the ages this is the
same fight that's been going on for 25
years in social security we wanted to
tie it to social security we offered an
amendment to do so 44 democrats voted
for it
one republican voted for and we were
informed at the time it came to vote
that if it was adopted the president of
the united states would be no it in my
judgment a vigorous democratic president
supported by a democratic majority in
the house and senate can win the support
for these programs but if you send a
republican president and a democratic
majority and the threat of a veto hangs
over the congress in my judgment you
will continue what happened in the
august session which is a clash of party
and inaction mr nixon comment well
obviously my views are a little
different first of all i don't see how
it's possible for a one-third of a body
such as the republicans have in the
house and the senate to stop two thirds
if the two thirds are adequately led i
would say too that when senator kennedy
refers to the action the house rules
committee there are eight democrats on
that committee and four republicans it
would seem to me again that it is very
difficult to blame the four republicans
for the eight democrats not getting
something through that particular
committee i would say further that to
blame the president and his veto power
for the inability of the senator and his
colleague to get action in his special
session misses the mark when the
president exercises his veto power he
has to have the people will find behind
not just the third of the congress
because let's consider it if the
majority of the members of the congress
felt that these particular proposals
were good issues
majority of those were democrats why
didn't they pass them and send to the
president and get a veto and have an
issue the reason why these particular
bills and these various fields have been
mentioned were not passed was not
because the president was against it was
because the people were against it was
because they were too extreme and i am
convinced that's the alternate proposals
that i have that the republicans have in
the field of health in the field of
education and the field of welfare
because they are not extreme because
they will accomplish the end without too
great cost in dollars or in freedom that
they could get through the next congress
the next question to vice president
nixon bought from mr fleming mr vice
president do i take it then you believe
that you could work better with
democratic majorities in the house and
senator kennedy could work with
senate i would say this that we of
course expect to pick up some seats in
both in the house and the senate we
would hope to control the house to get a
majority in the house in this election
we cannot of course control the senate i
would say that a president will be able
to lead a president will be able to get
his program through to the effect that
he has the support of the country to
support of the people sometimes we get
the opinion that in getting programs
through the house of the senate it's
barely a question of legislative
finagling and all that sort of thing it
isn't really that whenever a majority of
the people are for a program the house
and the senate responds to it and
whether this house and senate in the
next session is democratic or republican
if the country will have voted for the
candidate for the presidency and for the
proposals that he has made i believe
that you will find that the president if
it were a republican as it would be in
my case would be able to get his program
through that congress now i also said
that as far as senator kennedy's
proposals are concerned that again
the question is not simply one of my
presidential vetoes stopping programs
you must always remember that a
president can't stop anything unless he
has the people behind it
and the reason president eisenhower's
vetoes have been sustained the reason
the congress does not send up bills to
him which they think will be vetoed is
because the people and the congress a
majority of them know the country is
behind the president senator kennedy
well now let's look at these bills that
the vice president suggests with too
extreme one was a bill for dollar twenty
five cents an hour for anyone who works
in a store or a company it has a million
dollars a year of business i don't think
that's extreme at all and yet nearly 2/3
to 3/4 of the republicans and the house
of representatives voted against a
proposal secondly was the federal aid to
education bill it was a very because of
the defeat of teacher salaries it was
not a bill that demint in my opinion the
need the fact of the matter is it was a
bill that was less than you recommended
mr nixon this morning in your proposal
it was not an extreme bill and yet we
could not get one republican to join at
least i think four of the eight
democrats voted to send it to the floor
of the house not one republican and they
joined with those democrats who are
opposed to it i don't say the democrats
are united in their support of the
program but i do say a majority are and
i say a majority the republicans are
opposed to the third is medical care for
the ages which is tied to social
security which is financed out of social
security fund does not put a deficit on
the treasury the proposal advanced by
you and by mr javits would have cost
600 millions of dollars mr rockefeller
rejected and in new york said he didn't
agree with the financing at all said it
ought to be on social security so these
are three programs which are quite
moderate i think it shows the difference
between the two parties one party is
ready to move in these programs the
other party give them lip service
mr warren's question for senator
kennedy senator kennedy on another
subject communism is so often described
as an idea
a belief that exists somewhere other
than in the united states let me ask you
sir just how serious a threat to our
national security are these communist
subversive activities in the united
states today well i think they're
serious i think it's a matter that we
should continue to give great care and
attention to we should support the laws
which the united states has passed in
order to protect us from those who would
destroy us from within
you should sustain the department of
justice and its efforts in the fbi and
we should be continually alert i think
if the united states is maintaining a
strong society here in the united states
i think that we can meet any internal
threat the major threat is external and
will continue mr nixon come in i agree
with senator kennedy's appraisal
generally in this respect the question
of communism within the united states
says then one that has worried us in the
past it is one that will continue to be
a problem for years to come we have to
remember that the cold war that mr
khrushchev was waging and his colleagues
are waging his wage all over the world
and it's waged right here in the united
states that's why we have to continue to
be alert it is also essential in being
alert that we be fair fair because by
being fair we uphold the very freedoms
that the communists would destroy we
uphold the standards of conduct which
they would never follow and in this
connection i think that we must look to
the future having in mind the fact that
we fight communism at home not only by
our laws to deal with communists the few
who do become communists and the few who
do become try fellow travelers but we
also fight communism as at home by
moving against those various in justices
which exist in our society which the
communists feed upon and in that
connection i again would say while
senator kennedy says we are for the
status quo i do believe that he would
agree that i am just as sincere in
believing that my proposes for federal
aid to education my proposals for
there are justice sincerely held as his
the question again is not one of goals
we're for those goals it's one of means
mr van ogres question for vice
president nixon mr vice president in
one of your earlier statements you said
we've moved the head we built more
schools we built more hospitals no sir
isn't it true that the building of more
schools is a local matter for financing
were you claiming that the eisenhower
administration is responsible for the
building of these schools or is it the
local school districts to provide for
them not at all as a matter of fact your
question brings out a point that i'm
very glad to make too often in
appraising whether we are moving ahead
or not we think only of what the federal
government is doing now that isn't the
test of whether america moves the test
of whether america moves is whether the
federal government plus the state
government plus the local government
plus the biggest segment of all
individual enterprise moves we have for
example a gross national product for
proximately 500 billion dollars roughly
a hundred billion to one hundred and a
quarter billion of that is the result of
government action 400 billion
approximately is a result of what
individuals do now the reason the
eisenhower administration has moved the
reason that we've had the funds for
example locally to build the schools and
the hospitals and the highways to make
the progress that we have is because
this administration has encouraged
individual enterprise and it is resulted
in the greatest expansion of the private
sector of the economy that has ever been
witnessed in an eight-year period and
that is growth that is the growth that
we are looking for it is the growth that
this administration has supported and
that it's policy has stimulated senator
kennedy well i must say i think the
reason that the screws have been
constructed is because the local school
districts were willing to increase the
property taxes to it
industry high figure in my opinion
almost the point of diminishing returns
in order to sustain these schools
secondly i think we have a rich country
and i think we have a powerful country i
think what we have to do however is have
the president and the leadership set
before our country exactly what we must
do in the next decade if we're going to
maintain our security in education and
economic growth and development of
natural resources the soviet union is
making great games it isn't enough to
compare what might have been done eight
years ago or ten years ago or 15 years
ago or 20 years ago i want to compare
what we're doing with what our
adversaries are doing so that by the
year 1970 the united states is ahead in
education in health and building in
homes in economic strength that's the
big assignment the big task the big
function of the federal government and i
have the summation time please we've
completed our questions and our comments
and in just a moment would have a
summation done
this will allow three minutes and 20
seconds for the summation by each
candidate for eight minutes and 20
seconds for each candidate vice
president nixon will you make the first
summation thank you mr smith senator
kennedy first of all i think it is well
to put in perspective where we really do
spend with regard to the soviet union in
this whole matter of growth the soviet
union has been moving faster than we
have but the reason for that is obvious
they start from a much lower base
although they have been moving faster in
growth and we have we find for example
today that their total gross national
product is only 44 of our total gross
national product that's the same
percentage that it was 20 years ago and
as far as the absolute gap is concerned
we find that the united states has even
further ahead than it was 20 years ago
is this any reason for complacency not
at all because these are determined men
they are fanatical men and we have to
get the very most of our out of our
economy i agree with senator kennedy
completely on netskope where we disagree
is in the means that we
use to get the most out of our economy i
respectfully submit the senator kennedy
too often would rely too much on the
federal government on what it would do
to solve our profits to stimulate growth
i believe that when we examine the
democratic platform when we examine the
proposals that he has discussed tonight
when we compare them with the proposals
that i have made that these proposals
that he makes would not result in
greater growth for this country and
would be the case if we followed the
programs that i have advocated there are
many of the points that he has made that
i would like to comment upon the one in
the field of health is worth mentioning
our health program the one that senator
javits and other republican senators as
well as i supported is one that provides
for all people over 65 who want health
insurance the opportunity to have it if
they wanted it provides a choice of
having either government insurance or
private insurance but it compels nobody
to have insurance who does not want his
program under social security would
require everybody who had social
security to take government health
insurance whether he wanted it or not
and it would not cover several million
people who are not covered by social
security at all
here is one place where i think that our
program does a better job than hit the
other point that i would make is this
this downgrading of how much things cost
i think many of our people will
understand better when they look at what
happened when during the truman
administration when the government was
spending more than it took in we found
savings over a lifetime eaten up by
inflation we found the people who could
least afford it people on retired
incomes people on fixed incomes we found
them unable to meet their bills at the
end of the month it is essential that a
man who's president of this country
certainly stand for every program that
will mean for growth and i stand for
programs that will mean growth in
progress but it is also essential that
he not allow a dollar spent that could
be better spent
people themselves senator kennedy your
conclusion the point was made by mr
nixon that the soviet production is only
44 of ours i must say that 44 and that
soviet country is causing us a good deal
of trouble tonight i want to make sure
that it stays in that relationship i
don't want to see the day when it's 60
of ours and 70 and 75 and 80 and 90 of
ours with all the force and power that
it could bring to bear in order to cause
our destruction
secondly the vice president mentioned
medical care for the agency our program
was an amendment to the curb bail the
curb bill provided assistance to all
those who were not on social security i
think it's a very clear contrast 1935
when the social security act was written
94 out of 95 republicans voted against
it mr landon ran in 1936 to repeal it
in august of 1960 when we tried to get
it again but this time for medical care
we received the support of one
republican in the senate on this
occasion thirdly i think the question
before the american people is as they
look at this country and as they look
the world around them the goals are the
same for all america the means are at
question the means or issues if you feel
that everything that is being done now
is satisfactory at the relative power
and prestige and strength of the united
states is increasing in relation to that
of the communists that we have gaining
more security that we are achieving
everything as a nation that we should
achieve that we're achieving a better
life for our citizens and greatest
strength then i agree i think you should
vote for mr nixon but if you feel that
we have to move again in the 60 that the
function of the president is to set
before the people the unfinished
business of our society as franklin
roosevelt did in the 30 the agenda for
our people what we must do as a society
to meet our needs in this country and
protect our security and help the cause
of freedom as i said at the beginning
the question before us all faces all
republicans and all democrats is can
freedom in the next generation conquer
or the communists going to be successful
that's the great issue and if we meet
our responsibilities i think freedom
will caucus if we fail if we fail to
move ahead if we fail to the bail
sufficient military and economic and
social strength here in this country
then i think that the tide could begin
to run against us and i don't want
historians ten years from now to say
these were the years when the tide ran
out for the united states i want them to
say these were the years when the tide
came in these were the years when the
united states started to move again
that's the question before the american
people and only you can decide what you
want what you want this country to be
what you want to do with the future i
think we're ready to move and it is to
that great task that we're successful
that we will address ourselves this hour
has gone by all too quickly thank you
very much for permitting us to present
the next president of the united states
on this unique program i've been asked
by the candidates to thank the american
networks and the affiliated stations for
providing time and facilities for this
joint appearance other debates in this
series will be announced later and will
be on different subjects this is howard
k smith good night from chicago